REEDOM AS SUBMISSION
TO THE MORAL LAW
can be held accountable for his or her actions. Simply hav-
ing the urge to kill does not make someone a mass mur-
derer, they must also follow through on their inclinations.
This ‘follow through’ raises subsequent questions on the
concept “freedom”.
I will proceed in the following way: Firstly, I will give
an account of the will, and then move on to how a will
can be said to be free. Secondly, I will discuss Kant’s two
concepts of freedom of the will: freedom of choice (or
psychological freedom) and transcendental freedom. The
latter is a will that is in accordance with the moral law,
the former can roughly be called a common-sense view
of freedom of the will. Thirdly, I will go on to discuss au-
tonomy and rational agency. Autonomy is, briefly put, the
ability to act by one own’s accord, while heteronomy is the
opposite. For Kant, I think that autonomy is to act in ac-
cordance with the moral law, while heteronomy would be
to act for any other reason. Furthermore, rational agency
is to act in accordance with imperatives, either hypotheti-
cal or categorical. Finally, I will give an account of Henry
Allison’s incorporation thesis, and how this relates to the
other concepts mentioned above, before I end the essay
with a discussion on moral responsibility. Kant was a high-
ly complex thinker, and it will therefore be useful to bring
in some secondary literature in order to make Kant’s ideas
In this paper I shall account for a few central questions
in Kant’s philosophy important for the justification of
his ethics, and probably ethics in general. ‘Ought’ implies
‘can’. In other words, if there are things that we ought to
do, then we must be able to choose to do them. If we are
merely automata, mindless pieces on a cosmic chessboard,
then ethics appears to be something quite different from
what we normally consider it to be.
If, for instance, we are not free to choose how to act in
any meaningful way, then to say that a mass murderer is
evil is quite the same as to say that a flower is ugly. They
are both judgements that are not premised on any kind
of agency of the subject being judged. The flower has a
particular set of genes, it grew up in a specific environ-
ment where certain things that are essential for making the
flower beautiful were lacking, and so on, and so too with
the mass murderer. He or she was dealt a horrible hand
by nature, inherited bad genes, grew up in a bad family,
and therefore he or she could not be anything else than a
mass-murderer, just like the flower could not be anything
other than ugly.
However, if we have free will then it seems plausible
that the mass murderer can transcend his or her inclina-
tions. So, even if he or she has been dealt a horrible hand
by nature, due to the fact that he or she is free, he or she
By Harald Langslet Kavli
What does it mean to say that we have a free will and how can we reconcile the concept of a free will with the fact
that so much of what makes us act the way we do seems to be caused by causes outside ourselves? If our actions are
merely the consequences of the whims of fortune, does it even make sense to talk about ethics as something qualita-
tively different from aesthetics? To answer these questions, I turn to Immanuel Kant’s concept of freedom of the will.
ABBREVIATIONS
CpR = Critique of Practical Reason
G = Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals
Rel = Religion Within the Boundaries of Mere Reason29
clearer. First, though, I will consider Kant’s conception of
a maxim, which is important to understanding what we
do when we act.
I will argue that Kant’s conception of freedom of the
will entails a submission of our will to the moral law. This
contrasts with a common-sense and pre-theoretical con-
ception of freedom of the will, for instance that freedom
of the will consists in doing what we want to do, whatever
that might be. I will try to keep this contrasting concept in
mind throughout the paper, and hopefully give the reader
some reasons for moving towards Kant’s concept and away
from the pre-theoretical one.
I. Maxims, Actions and Rational Agency
In a footnote in Groundwork, Kant defines a maxim as:
the subjective principle of volition; the objective prin-
ciple (i.e., that which would also serve subjectively as
the practical principle for all rational beings if reason
had complete control over the faculty of desire) is the
practical law (G, footnote to 4:401).
It seems as though Kant views maxims as working a bit
like a computer program, so a specific maxim could then
be “If A happens, then do B, so that C”. Or with a more
concrete example: If I get in a situation where my life is
threatened (A), do tell a lie (B) if that can get me out of the
situation (C). This is of course a maxim that Kant would
reject, although it bears the form of a maxim. Kant seems
to think that we form maxims when we deliberate on how
we should act, and that is what makes us rational agents.
Rational agency is also connected to forming maxims
in this means-ends way. If I have a desire for something in
a certain situation, I can use my reason to find the means
to fulfill that desire. For instance, if I desire a cold beer on
a hot summer’s day, I can form the maxim “If it is a hot
summer’s day, go to the fridge and get a beer”. In this way,
I form a hypothetical imperative: if I want C in A, do B.
The imperative is binding, however, only to the extent that
I actually do desire C. On the other hand, a categorical
imperative is binding regardless of my inclinations.
II. The Will and Two Conceptions of the Freedom of
the Will
The will is a kind of causality of living beings insofar as
they are rational, and freedom would be that property
of such causality that it can be efficient independently
of alien causes determining it, just as natural necessity
is the property of the causality of all nonrational beings
to be determined to activity by the influence of alien
causes (G, 4:446).
Returning to the comparison between the flower and the
mass murderer considered above, we can outline an ex-
planation of how we can blame the mass murderer for his
evil, but not the flower for its ugliness. Unlike the flower,
which is merely determined by alien causes (as in exter-
nal causes or anything that is outside of the will), like the
nutrients in the soil and access to water and sunlight, the
mass murderer is not just determined by “external causes”.
He is also determined by something that is not external to
him, namely his will. How can this be enough for us to
say that the mass murderer is accountable for his actions?
Having a will makes us able to act in a way that is not
merely determined by natural necessity, but rather of our
own making. This is not quite enough, though, because if
we simply use our will to act in accordance with our incli-
nations, then it turns out to be not that different from the
flower. This flower turned out ugly because it grew up in
a poor environment, and this person turned in to a mass
murderer because he had this set of inclinations. For the
will to be truly free, then, it must transcend the inclinati-
ons of the person who has the will, and if it does not do so,
the action is not the result of an agent having submitted
his or her will to the moral law. If for instance, the mass
murderer is inclined to kill someone in a certain situation,
their will will be free when they do not simply let it (their
will) be an extension of their inclinations to kill, but rather
subject their will to a moral law. His will will then be free,
in that it is not merely caused by the mass murderer having
a certain set of inclinations that are determined by things
outside his control. On this point, Kant writes:
[...] in the question about that freedom which must be
put at the basis of all moral laws and the imputation
appropriate to them, it does not matter whether the
causality determined in accordance with a natural law
is necessary through determining grounds lying within
the subject or outside him, or in the first case whether
these determining grounds are instinctive or thought
by reason, if, [...] these determining representations
have the ground of their existence in time and indeed
in the antecedent state, and this in turn in a preced-
ing state, and so forth, these determinations may be
internal and they may have psychological instead of
mechanical causality, that is, produce actions by means
of representations and not by bodily movements; they
ARTIKKEL30
are always determining grounds of the causality of a
being insofar as its existence is determinable in time
and therefore under the necessitating conditions of
past time, which are thus, when the subject is to act,
no longer within his control, and which may therefore
bring with them psychological freedom (if one wants
to use this term for a merely internal chain of represen-
tations in the soul) but nevertheless natural necessity;
and they therefore leave no transcendental freedom,
which must be thought as independence from eve-
rything empirical and so from nature generally, [...];
without this freedom (in the latter and proper sense),
which alone is practical a priori, no moral law is pos-
sible and no imputation in accordance with it (CpR,
AA 5:96–7).
If the will is to be free in the transcendental way, and not
merely psychological, it must submit to the principle “to
act on no other maxim than that which can also have as
an object itself as a universal law” (G, 4:447). Thus goes
the universality formulation of the categorical imperative.
On the grounds of this formulation, Kant concludes that
“a free will and a will under moral laws are one and the
same” (G, 4:447).
We see that Kant deviates from a completely liberta-
rian conception of the free will, which Kant calls a psycho-
logical freedom of the will. Freedom, in the meaningful
way, is not merely to choose X rather than Y, since that
choice can just be the result of a chain of mental causes.
This would not be that different from the flower merely
responding to its environment or the mass murderer who
simply follows his inclinations.
Furthermore, it would also be insufficient to talk about
blameworthiness or praiseworthiness. For, if two people
act in accordance with their inclinations, but Person 1’s
inclinations are mostly benevolent, whereas Person 2’s are
malevolent, they are nonetheless both as determined by
natural necessity. As such, neither can be accorded praise
or blame.
A person can be blamed or praised, however, on the
basis of whether he or she chooses to submit his or her will
to the moral law, and by doing so, transcending his or her
inclinations. It is reason that gives us the capacity to do so.
It might be objected that this seems to give us much
less elbow room in the way we act, and therefore, that this
conception of the freedom is at the very least a bit odd.
The agent who does not submit his or her will to the moral
law, can choose to help or ignore someone in need of help,
while the person who does submit his or her will cannot.
FREEDOM AS SUBMISSION TO THE MORAL LAW
For example, if the agent in question sees someone drow-
ning and they have not chosen to submit their will, then it
seems that the choice is open for them. That is, he or she
can choose to either try to help the drowning person, or to
ignore them. On the other hand, for the person who has
submitted his or her will to the moral law, it seems like
there is only one choice—he or she must help the drow-
ning person (excluding the possibility that there are not
very good reasons for not doing so). If I (and presumably
anyone else) had been the person drowning, I would have
wanted someone to help. Therefore, I would not will that
(the act of ) ignoring someone who is drowning, even if
one is capable of helping them, should be a universal law.
At first glance it seems then that a person acting in
accordance with his or her freedom of choice is more free.
There are simply more ways of being in the world for those
who act in accordance with their freedom of choice. They
can choose to ignore people who are drowning, or wither
away in an apartment, spending their lives on videogames,
or they can dedicate their lives to becoming a tyrant. They
can choose the most sociopathic behaviour imaginable, or
they can choose to emulate a saint. But Kant would object,
I think, by saying that as long as the will has not been sub-
mitted to the moral law, they are acting in the accordance
with their inclinations, and therefore, while some of them
might be more or less pro-social due to their inclinations,
none of them are truly free. Their acts are just caused by
natural necessity.
Also, when we try to figure out what we should do,
or how we should live, we are not looking for as many
options to the answer as possible, but rather for the right
answer.
It seems, however, that Kant presupposes that the
idea of the ‘self ’ is constituted more so by reason, rather
than one’s inclinations and passions. In order to give some
weight to this presupposition, I will now turn to Henry
Allison’s discussion.
III. The Incorporation Thesis
In chapter 2 of his book Kant’s Theory of Freedom, Henry
Allison discusses the distinction between the empirical and
intelligible character in Kant’s philosophy. A first approach
to this distinction, which Allison uses, is to draw on the
distinction Kant makes between the phenomenal and the
noumenal world. There is a way in which the world and
every object in the world appears to me, due to my senses
and categories, but there is also a world of objects in them-
selves, that is, a world of objects as they are in themsel-
ves. Allison quotes Kant who writes “Every efficient cause31HARALD LANGSLET KAVLI
must have a character, that is, a law of its causality without
which it would not be a cause” (A539/B567, quoted in
Allison 1990, 30). If therefore, every efficient cause must
have a character, it seems then that ‘character’ in this sense
is not only something that a human can have, since it is
not only humans which can be efficient causes of somet-
hing. To say that the character is ‘empirical’ means here
that it is accessible through the senses and “describable in
empirical terms” (Allison 1990, 30). Allison also claims
that Kant thought that at least some rational agents can
be conceived of as having not only an empirical character,
but also an intelligible character. That the character is ‘in-
telligible’ means that the character and its activity “would
neither conform to the conditions of possible experience
nor be describable in empirical terms” (Ibid.). With this
conception, we get the “the formula for the thought of the
empirically unconditioned activity of a noumenal subject”
(Ibid.). The key idea here is that an empirical character is
to a large extent caused by things outside of him or herself,
while an intelligible character is not.
Kant claims that:
[T]he will of every man has an empirical character,
which is nothing but a certain causality of his rea-
son, so far as that causality exhibits, in its effects in the
[field] of appearance, a rule from which we may gather
what, in their kind and degrees, are the actions of rea-
son and the grounds thereof, and so may form an es-
timate concerning the subjective principles of his will.
Since this empirical character must itself be discovered
from the appearances which are its effect and from the
rule to which experience shows them to conform, it
follows that all the actions of men in the [field of ]
appearance are determined in conformity with the or-
der of nature, by their empirical character and by the
other causes which cooperate with that character; and
if we could exhaustively investigate all the appearances
of men’s wills, there would not be found a single hu-
man action which we could not predict with certainty,
and recognize as proceeding necessarily from its ante-
cedent conditions. So far, then, as regards this empiri-
cal character there is no freedom; and yet it is only in
the light of this character that man can be studied - if,
that is to say, we are simply observing, and in the man-
ner of anthropology seeking to institute a physiologi-
cal investigation into the motive causes of his actions.
(A549–550/B577–8, quoted in Allison 1990, 31)
This excerpt reveals something interesting about Kant’s de-
terminism. As Allisson points out, this does not depend on
a token-token identification between physical states and
mental states or a neurophysiological reduction, but they
are rather largely psychological (Allison 1990, 31). So, for
instance, if I yell at my neighbour for playing the trumpet,
it is caused by my beliefs, inclinations and desires, such as
the desire to be spared of the cacophony wrought about by
my neighbour’s trumpet playing, and the belief that to yell
at him is both the proper thing for me to do and also an
efficient way to silence him.
Allison then goes on to discuss the relationship bet-
ween the intelligible and empirical character, and points
to an ambiguity in the excerpt from Kant quoted above.
Do “the actions of reason” and “the subjective principles of
his will” refer to the intelligible or the empirical character?
Allison claims we should take these things to refer to the
empirical character, and that this reading will enable us to:
attribute a causality of reason to the empirical character
of the will of a rational agent. The crucial point here is
that, so construed, the empirical character involves not
simply a disposition to behave or to respond in certain
predictable ways in given situations but a disposition
to act on the basis of certain maxims, to pursue certain
ends, and to select certain means for the realization of
these ends. That is why even the empirical study of
human behaviour, particularly that which is provided
by “pragmatic anthropology,” is, in a very real sense, a
study of rational agency (Ibid., 33).
Allison claims that Kant thought “the capacity to act on
the basis of imperatives in general (not merely the cate-
gorical imperative) as the defining characteristic of free
agency” (Ibid, 36). In other words, free agency also inclu-
des the capacity to act on hypothetical imperatives, such as
if I want to be free of the noise, I should complain. If I do
so, I will not only act on the desire to get rid of the noise,
but also act on a practical rule: if the neighbour is noisy,
then complain. Furthermore, simply having a desire is not
sufficient to act; I also need a principle for action. Allison
quotes Kant who says that:
freedom of the will [Willkür] is of a wholly unique
nature in that an incentive can determine the will to an
action only insofar as the individual has incorporated it
into his maxim (has made it into the general rule in ac-
cordance with which he will conduct himself...) (Rel
6:24; 19, quoted in Allison 1990, 39–40).
ARTIKKEL32
Illustration by Stine S. Gudbrandsen
The incorporation thesis is then the claim that to merely
have an inclination or desire is not sufficient to cause an
action, I also need to incorporate the former into a rule
for acting, that is, a maxim. Allison connects this thesis
with Kant’s claim that we cannot act except under the
idea of freedom (G 4:448, 115). Allison claims that “I
cannot conceive of myself as [a rational] agent without
regarding myself as pursing ends that I frame for myself
and that I regard as rational to pursue” (Allison 1990, 40).
Furthermore, I must believe that I control my inclinati-
ons, in that I can decide which of them I want to act on.
He further claims that “we cannot conceive of ourselves as
rational agents without attributing to our agency an ‘intel-
ligible character’, capable of determining itself to act on
the basis of rational principles, ‘independently of the con-
ditions of time” (Ibid., 41).
There are some issues with this interpretation. What,
for instance, comes of Kant’s distinction between psy-
chological freedom and transcendental freedom? In Kant
it seems like it is only the latter sense of freedom that is
freedom proper, since it is transcendental freedom that is
independent of external causes. In Allison’s reading, ho-
wever, they seem to be equal to each other.
The most important takeaway, however, is the idea of
the intelligible character. I will dare to say that since this
character is not merely a bundle of the effects of exter-
nal causes, but rather something more stable, that Kant
might have thought that the intelligible character is more
properly ourself, rather than our empirical character. More
work is needed to defend this idea, but unfortunately this
is beyond the scope of this paper.
IV. Moral Responsibility
How then should we think about moral responsibility?
Can we say that a person is ‘free enough’ to be culpable
for his or her actions? Based on the preceding discussion,
we cannot say that a person is free to have a particular set
of inclinations, beliefs or desires. They are free to subsume
these things under a moral law, and if there is a resulting
action, this is what we are therefore culpable for. It also
seems like reason gives us the ability to choose which in-
clinations we should follow and which we should supress,
or to act regardless of any inclination beyond respect for
the moral law. It gives us the ability to identify ends and
means for these ends, and therefore to be less fully deter-
mined by our inclinations. On this picture, a human is
FREEDOM AS SUBMISSION TO THE MORAL LAW33
more than just a sophisticated machine, and so given the
elbow room that he or she has to be governed by his or her
will, it seems highly plausible that he or she can also be
held accountable for his or her actions.
One interesting question that remains unresolved, at
least for me, is whether Kant thinks that we can or may
influence our inclinations, and whether he thinks that we
have any reason to attempt this. Would Kant for instance
think that an extremely sadistic person who supresses the
urge to act on their inclinations, and rather submits his
will to the moral law, has done all that he or she needs
to do? Or should this person also try to align his or her
inclinations to a more benevolent attitude? Kant is clear
that an act only has moral worth if it is done out of duty.
Therefore, it seems that whether you have benevolent at-
titudes or not is irrelevant for the moral worth of your ac-
tions. But would he still be open to a pragmatic argument
that working on your inclinations, to the extent that it is
possible, might make it easier for you to actually act from
duty in the long run? Also, would that perhaps be in ac-
cordance with the categorical imperative? At least to me it
seems quite plausible that I could will to be a moral law
that says that people should work on their inclinations.
V. Conclusion
I have accounted for Kant’s conception of freedom, auto-
nomy, rational agency and Allison’s incorporation thesis.
Freedom can be both psychological, which is merely the
ability to act on a desire, or transcendental, which is to
act in accordance with the moral law. In the latter, our
actions are autonomous, as opposed to heteronomous.
Rational agency involves the creation of a maxim for an
action, which again involves an imperative that can be
either hypothetical/prudential or categorical. The incorpo-
ration thesis is the claim that merely having an inclination
or desire is not sufficient to cause an action; I also need to
incorporate it into a rule for acting, that is, a maxim.
The notion of freedom has significant bearing on
moral responsibility, and I have attempted to demonstrate
how Kant brings a lot to the table that can enable us to un-
derstand this better. We are free when we chose to ignore
our inclinations and rather submit our wills to the moral
laws which we can grasp with our ability to reason. Some
might still be a bit perplexed that we have ended up with a
conception of freedom which seems to be quite restrictive.
Freedom, someone might say, consists in being able to
do whatever we desire to do. I hope, however, that I have
given some reasons against this intuition. Our inclinations
are to a large extent caused by things outside of our own
control. We cannot control our genes, our upbringing, or
to a large extent our circumstances. But we can, according
to Kant, choose how to respond to our inclinations. This
conception of freedom might take us far afield from any
pre-theoretic conception of freedom, but it is nevertheless
far from unique in the history of the concept of freedom
of the will. Similar ideas were stated by other thinkers like
Epictetus and St. Anselm.1 To give further reasons for ac-
cepting a Kantian conception of freedom of the will, it
might be necessary to explore the conception of selfhood,
and the question on whether our reason is more truly our-
selves than our passions and inclinations.
